# RWRderivedPSRModel
This study presents a new empirical probability model for surface rupture (PSR) for crustal earthquakes, a key component of probabilistic fault-displacement hazard analyses. The dataset is based on a literature review of earthquake source parameters from 1970 to 2023. The new PSR model uses the rupture-width ratio (RWR) instead of moment magnitude and styles of faulting (SoF), unlike most PSR models. The RWR is determined by dividing the rupture width ($W_{Rup}$) by the fault width. If the rupture dimension is unavailable, we assumed source-scaling models (SSM) from Huang et al. (SRL, 2024) (Hea24) that account for the width-limited effect based on regional seismogenic thickness to estimate $W_{Rup}$. The proposed PSR model uses the Beta cumulative distribution function (CDF), which incorporates two key physical factors: the influence of fault geometry on RWR and the localization of rupture at depth. The functional form derived from the Beta CDF rather than a typical logistic regression avoids unphysical trends arising from a sparse subset of earthquakes. Other physical indices, such as SoF, underground material stiffness, and a longer fault length indicated by the fault aspect ratio, were evaluated but not modeled due to high epistemic uncertainty resulting from limited earthquakes in certain subgroups. A recommended procedure is built to translate Hea24 from a regional scale into a fault-based evaluation method, which consists of the mean prediction and aleatory variability propagated from SSM to PSR in this study. Finally, the proposed PSR model accounts for fault-specific fault geometry and normalized average hypocenter depth, while incorporating empirically constrained forms that are better suited to fault-based PSR evaluation.


The new RWR-derived PSR model is provided in [sub_RWR_derived_PSRmodel.m], with an example main program in [main_prediction.m]. The regression code for an example table is provided in [sub_fitBetaMLE_fixbeta.m] for the stage 1 (S1) model and in [sub_fitBetaMLE_fixbeta_addedNMZHypo.m] for the stage 2 (S2) model, with an example main program in [main_regression.m].

Example codes for applying the proposed procedure to translate the regional-scale source-scaling models provided by Hea24 into a fault-based Hea24 SSM are shown in the folder [fault_based_SSM_PSR_application], which corresponds to Fig. 13(b) and Fig. 14(a). The main example program is in [main_fault_based_Hea24_w_RWR_PSR.m], with a fundamental fault-based Hea24 SSM provided in [sub_fault_based_Hea24.m] and [sub_makeComparecurve.m], and other related scripts include [sub_pt_AV_range.m], [sub_pt_progress_comp_threecurves.m], [sub_pt_RWRPSR_w_other_models.m], and [sub_RWR_derived_PSRmodel.m]. The [sub_CPSR_Mea24.m] is sourced from CPSR: Mea24 (Mammarella et al. EQS (2024), doi: 10.1177/87552930241293570), which was downloaded from https://github.com/MammarellaLisa/CPSR (last accessed May 2025).

These are developed by Bob J.Y. Huang and Norman A. Abrahamson (2026, in preparation).
